the united states and china
have never been overt
enemies at any time
between world war ii
and 2021 when joe biden initiated
current hostilities the breakdown of the
strategic relationship
hot take all right within that span of
time
believe it or not the chinese army and
the american army
directly fired bullets at one another
in what we now call the korean war
i don't know why we can't call it the
korean civil war but the war that
created
the division between north korea and
south korea
all right they fired live ammunition
at one another nevertheless
they were not enemies the generation of
political and military leaders in china
still very much alive at that time
during the korean war
they were veterans of world war ii what
they call
the sino-japanese war
and they carried with them the memory
of the military assistance financial
systems and cooperation
provided by the americans to the chinese
communists
they have memories stretching from the
east coast of china
all the way to yunnan all right and that
sense of gratitude
connection and collaboration it ran deep
did the overt military alliance
between the united states and china
begin
what am i referring to what most people
remember
as the nixon kissinger pact
i guess that's what people call it in as
much as anyone
ever talks about this uh i i have a real
question for you
if we did a poll how many americans
are even aware that president nixon
met mao zedong and formed a military
alliance with them look that
that very basic fact
it's one of the most important things to
know with history of the 20th century
that is still influential is still
crucially important now
in the 21st century it
it began in 1971.
and the flashpoint the conflict at that
time
was not vietnam was not cambodia
was not the division between north and
south korea
it is a surreal fact that the conflict
that drew china and the united states to
work together
was in india it was the war
in 1971 between india
and pakistan a war
that directly impacted the lives
of more than 100 million
people all right really it could be
about 200 million people
when i say directly impacted the lives i
mean they were physically
there they were in areas where bullets
were being
fired bombs were being dropped it was a
brief war
the 1971 war okay but it was not a
counter-terrorism
operation right it was not a police
action
of the military it was a war that
involved
all three branches of the formal
military units of like
six different countries three branches
meaning the air force was involved there
were airplanes dropping bombs
the navy was involved there were naval
battles and the land armies
of india and pakistan were involved
russia the soviet union
sent naval vessels to fight
on the same side as india
against pakistan
this was something of much greater
symbolic
value than it was strategic value
now look i'm 42 years old
i feel i have a balanced and mature view
of richard nixon i don't regard him as a
vampire i don't regard him as a
psychopath
i don't regard him as insane and i can
actually tell you about some things
nixon did that were uniquely morally
positive
look into his record with first nations
people indigenous americans
good luck finding any other president in
this united states who even cared
okay and he cared he really tried to get
positively involved as their languages
were going extinct
and to question the whole history of
what america had done to
its indigenous peoples and what america
ought to do next
nixon cared nixon really tried to make a
difference
however nixon was an alcoholic
he was not terribly intelligent he was
not
very well educated especially not about
places like
india and pakistan nixon very
fundamentally misjudged
the situation he believed profoundly
that india was now in a pro-communist
alliance with the soviet union with
russia
that india was now going to carry the
flag of communism
and specifically russian-aligned
communism throughout the third world
that india was going to be this you know
today the population is a billion at
that time i don't know
this this nation of 800 million or
whatever it was
backing and expanding the the soviet
front
throughout africa throughout southeast
asia that worldwide this was a massive
domino that had just fallen in russia's
favor
and that was not true at all
fundamentally in 1971
india was committed to parliamentary
democracy and they still are
in 2021. they were committed
to parliamentary democracy and they
needed someone
to sell them aircraft and tanks
and they got into the bed with the
russians to do that
because the british weren't going to do
it they weren't going to be armed by the
british
the germans at that time weren't going
to talk about west germany they're not
going to do it
the french weren't going to do it and
the united states of america
at least under nixon wasn't going to do
it they needed
the military hardware and to a very
limited extent
they got into bed with the russians now
it's easy to misjudge that
mao zedong
[Laughter]
i can't make the kind of balanced
statement about mao zedong
that i made about nixon right
at best mao zedong was a very
childish very shallow man i
still don't feel i've come to a
definitive answer
like i don't feel i've answered the
question to my own satisfaction
of how crazy mal was i've seen a lot of
contradictory evidence
even looking at the guy's handwriting if
you've seen handwritten statements in
chinese from mao
there's some times when i see his
handwriting and i think this guy was
completely insane he was some bad man
and there but there have been other
times when i saw his writing he looks
perfectly rational in control
i think well you see how misleading
these things can be you look at one
snippet of a man's life
out of context okay um
mao zedong was intensely
jealous of the aircraft
that russia had provided to india
whether or not it is a real fact that
mao had been
asking russia for these aircrafts these
are these
really sexy looking what am i going to
say
really fancy looking jet fighters of
that era fighter bombers produced
by the soviet union in reality history
has shown they are
they are really not very effective
aircraft
compared to what the americans could
offer but
they look very impressive on the runway
this beautiful
sleek modern geometric design so this is
what's remembered as the mig series
event aircraft mig
so mig 17 mig 21
fighter bombers okay whether or not
mao zedong felt he had been competing
for russia
to provide these aircraft okay mao's
perspective
on the korean war or the korean civil
war is that
the chinese army committed a huge number
of men
to korea and they lost and they died
because they didn't have the russian air
force backing them because russia didn't
commit
the aircraft to make it happen for the
communist side
in korea okay now he's he's partly
correct and by the way it's not the case
that there were
zero russian aircraft involved in the
korean war
but that's that's not a completely
insane perspective
on this group very briefly
mal committed an enormous number of men
chinese men to fight on the north korean
side and he thought he would win by
overwhelming numbers that's not the way
it works in the 20th century
and the more men you have the more
mouths you have to feed
and a lot of those men starved the most
common anecdote to hear
from the chinese side about what it was
like fighting in the korean war
was that they ate toothpaste they ended
up eating
the toothpaste they brought with them to
brush their teeth they ate
cats they ate dogs that starvation was a
problem
so he deployed a huge number of men the
american side didn't have a huge number
of men
they had some really good pilots that's
some really good aircraft
and yeah it was a bloodbath unbelievably
terrible brutal war that today
outside of korea nobody remembers and
take 2021
i think fewer and fewer people in korea
even you know
remember what happened okay so yeah
apart from
the aesthetics or the symbolic value of
having
support from the russian side in terms
of receiving these aircraft that china
should be receiving these aircraft not
india
not their enemy india to put a little
bit of emphasis on it because he
now felt correctly or incorrectly that
india was his rival
and was his enemy already at this at
this early stage
um in case you didn't know
mao zedong's eldest son
and he had another son who was mentally
handicapped
but his eldest son who many people
presume would have inherited political
power would become an
important person in chinese politics and
it was you know
his good son his important son it was
groomed for leadership and so on
his elder son died in the korean
war in the north versus south korea and
it is plausible that he blamed
the situation with military aircraft for
his sons
hot take hot tape
what would have happened in the vietnam
war
if the russians had committed aircraft
okay
the whole the whole history people get
so used to this they forget how weird it
is
the whole history of what happened in
vietnam the whole history of what
happened in laos
the history what happened in cambodia
the americans keep
sending these aircraft and doing
saturation bombing they're not having
dog
fights there aren't big russian fighters
dog fighting with them sorry that's the
slang term in english for it since world
war one
we've said dogma there aren't aircraft
from the other side
fighting back and preventing them right
the americans have bombers and they have
helicopters
that just have unchallenged free reign
over the skies
of laos cambodia vietnam
why because the russians
didn't commit aircraft on the other side
not my opinion this is not my
interpretation
of what happened in vietnam however
this was a perspective
and i believe it was one of the most
important aspects of mao zedong's
perspective on what happened
and what went wrong in the you know what
what really was world war three
in vietnam because it wasn't just the
vietnam war it was the
vietnamese american chinese russian
war i mean the russians were crucially
involved
and anyone could step back and say well
well the russians they kind of
i mean they had an embassy the russians
did very little
and that's why the history of unfolding
was possible at all
if the russians had put their foot down
from the very start and said no
they deployed the aircraft if they
deployed the men right
none of this could have happened and you
know obviously a really big contrast
here is the cuban missile crisis
why didn't the americans do in cuba what
they did in
vietnam because they couldn't the
russians drew orlando said no
the russians would not allow the
americans to conquer cuba or even just
kind of mess around
militarily right thus the cuban missile
so
someone in mao zedong's position would
be sensitive to that like oh okay i see
how it is
so cuban lives matter but vietnamese
lives don't matter
right so what about why don't korean
lives matter why don't chinese lives
matter
and now and now you come to find out
you're this crazy dictator mao zedong
and you come to find out the russians
are giving aircraft
to the indians that russia is going to
support
your enemy and your rival india
in precisely the way they didn't support
you
and why for reasons that from a chinese
perspective make no sense or don't
matter
russia is arming india russia is shining
signing a special friendship and
cooperation agreement
with india so that india can fight a war
to partition pakistan into two different
countries
instead of being one country now
from a chinese perspective that just
doesn't make sense
okay i this is my hypothesis
mao zedong was furious
and the beginning the beginning
of the american chinese strategic
alliance
that sentimentally began in world war ii
sure
the memory of americans and chinese
fighting together
against the japanese and a kind of
special friendship and connection that
endured and endured for mao personally
and for the whole elite of the communist
party and the military there
that endured despite the korean war
experience okay
in 1971
the chinese and the americans find
themselves
on the same side against india
and that was a fundamentally irrational
ridiculous alliance that continued from
1971 to 2021.
any 10 year old kid you explain politics
you sit down with a 10 year old
and explain what the situation was on
planet earth back when bill clinton
was president united states well yeah
there's this evil communist dictatorship
called
china um but america is on their side
and they're friends oh and um india
they're a democracy they have freedom of
speech they have a parliament they have
elections they have newspapers they'll
have to criticize the government
oh yeah yeah yeah they're good in those
ways but there are enemies
um america is instead in an alliance
with
china and pakistan why pakistan
because pakistan's an enemy of india oh
yeah yeah yeah yeah and there's this
there's this other country russia
they used to be a communist decision but
now they're not i mean when you're
talking about the bill clinton era
that's all over they're now a democracy
too
whether or not you had optimism back at
that time about how democratic russia
would be
oh yeah but there but there are still
our enemies because we're we're allied
with
with china that's like the that's this
top priority for the united states of
america
all the way from 1971 to 2021.
it was a fundamentally irrational
stupid decision made by one [ __ ] one
alcoholic
by nixon the same guy who bungled the
vietnam war so badly and bungled
cambodian bungled laos
did so many other terrible things at a
cost of hundreds of thousands of lives
i don't want to estimate how many dead
bodies really we can attribute to
the nixon interesting topic for another
video how many deaths can we blame nixon
for
maybe it's only tens of thousands i
should i should watch my words but in
case
you know this guy made this one
bad decision that has had so many
long-term consulates now if you were
explaining the world to a ten-year-old
when bill clinton was a power the
ten-year-old might say back to you
that's stupid that doesn't make any
sense
why isn't america part of a
pro-democracy alliance
where they are fundamentally allied with
japan and india against
china wouldn't that make more sense
and it was not until the year 2021
when joe biden asked that question came
up with a new answer
and now now
the whole world is going to change
how bad is it going to get
what are the chinese willing to do in
terms of
infiltration information warfare
sabotage
espionage including industrial espionage
industrial
sabotage unfair economic competition
in terms of what their navy is going to
do what their air force can do how about
state-sponsored terrorism
what are the chinese capable of what are
they willing to do
if america is their overt enemy
the answer is we don't
know because since world war
ii despite the vicissitudes of foreign
policy that have come and gone
since world war ii there has never been
a period of time
when china and the united states were
overt enemies
when they were not to some extent
on the same side